Kinase Handbook

Abstract

Kinases are important drug targets that control cell growth,
proliferation, differentiation and metabolism. This process involves
phosphorylation of multiple substrates in cellular signal transduction
pathways. Here, the authors provide a synopsis on assay technologies,
mechanistic considerations for assay design and development pertaining
to kinase enzymes. This chapter, along with some of the earlier chapters
in this manual on basics of enzyme assays, mechanism of action and
purity and identity considerations, serves as an excellent resource for
beginners in HTS applications.

Introduction

Enzymatic phosphate transfers are one of the predominant mechanisms for
regulating the growth, differentiation and metabolism of cells. The
post-translational modification of proteins with phosphate leads to
dramatic changes in conformation resulting in the modulation of binding,
catalysis and recruitment of effector molecules that regulate cellular
signaling pathways. Examples include the recruitment of SH2 domain
containing proteins, the activation of gene transcription pathways and
the activation or deactivation of specific cell surface receptors. The
practical design and implementation of these assays for drug discovery
and development applications will be the focus of this section.

The keys to protein kinase assay development lie in the ability to: 1.
Choose an appropriate “readout” technology 2. Have ample quantities of
enzymes, cell lines, antibodies and reference compounds 3. Optimize the
assay for buffer conditions, reagent concentrations, timing, stopping,
order of addition, plate type and assay volume.

…

Radioactive Assay Technologies

Traditional kinase assays measure the transfer of the 32P from the γ
position of ATP to a peptide or protein substrate results in a 32P
labeled peptide or protein that may be separated away from the ATP by
capture on a filter and subsequent washing. The quantity of
phosphoprotein is quantified by scintillation counting.

…

Fluorescence Assays

Although fluorescent assays are very useful in HTS, the classic issue
with these assays is that they are susceptible to interference from
compounds that either absorb light in the excitation or emission range
of the assay, or that are themselves fluorescent resulting in false
negatives.

…

Fluorescence Anisotropy (Polarization)

Anisotropy can be measured when a fluorescent molecule is excited with
polarized light. The ratio of emission intensity in each polarization
plane gives a measure of anisotropy.

…

Time-Resolved Förster Resonance Energy Transfer (TR-FRET)

These assays are based upon the use of a Europium or Terbium chelate,
and labeled anti-phosphopeptide or anti-phosphotyrosine antibodies that
bind to phosphorylated peptides.

…

Luminescent Oxygen Channeling (AlphaScreen, AlphaLISA)

AlphaScreen is a bead-based, non-radioactive, Amplified Luminescent
Proximity Homogenous Assay.

…

Coupled Assays

Coupled assays require the addition of more enzymes to convert a product
or substrate into a detectable signal.

…

Assay Development

A general strategy for assay development should include: 1. Choose an
appropriate readout technology 2. Synthesize, purify and characterize
enzymes and substrates 3. Design a starting protocol based on prior
literature or substrate specificity 4. Optimize through matrix
experiments and pilot studies

…

Mechanism of Action of Kinase Inhibitors

Protein tyrosine kinase inhibitors can act by binding directly in the
ATP binding site (type I), extending into an adjacent allosteric site
(type II), or binding to distal sites (type III).

…

Assay Optimization

Optimization involves testing variables such as pH, buffer, plate type,
and detector reagents to maximize reproducibility, signal-to-noise
ratio, and physiological relevance.

…

Enzyme Preparations

Purity and activity of enzymes are critical. Contamination with other
kinases can lead to misleading results.

…

Plate Types and Volumes

White plates are preferred for luminescence, black plates for
fluorescence. Assay volumes range from 3 µL (1536-well) to 50 µL
(384-well).

…

Buffers and Solvents

Buffers, detergents, and cofactors must be optimized. DMSO tolerance
should also be tested.

…

Pilot Screens

Pilot studies are essential to test assay robustness using metrics such
as Z’ factor (>0.5 desirable).

------------------------------------------------------------------------
